.TH ZED 1 "2026-06-15" "zed 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zed \- a fast, terminal-based, modal code editor written in Zig
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zed
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zed
(\(lqzig-editor\(rq) is a modal terminal editor in the spirit of
.BR nvim (1)
and
.BR hx (1).
It has a comprehensive vim-style keymap, multiple cursors, fuzzy file and
global-content search pickers, syntax highlighting, and an AstroNvim/Helix-style
themed interface \(em all with no external runtime dependencies.
.PP
If
.I file
exists it is opened; otherwise a buffer with that name is created on the first
write. With no
.I file
argument an empty buffer is opened. The editor requires an interactive terminal.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show usage and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-log " path"
Write timestamped diagnostic logs (including microsecond render/input timings)
to
.IR path .
Logging is off by default.
.SH MODES
zed is modal: NORMAL for movement and commands, INSERT for typing, VISUAL and
V\-LINE and V\-BLOCK for selections, COMMAND for the
.RB \(lq : \(rq
line, and PICKER for the fuzzy finders.
.B Esc
returns to NORMAL mode.
.SH "NORMAL MODE KEYS"
.SS Motions
.TP
.B h j k l
Left, down, up, right (arrow keys also work).
.TP
.B w W b B e E
Word / WORD motions.
.TP
.B 0 ^ $
Start, first non-blank, end of line.
.TP
.B gg G \fItag\fP{n}G
First line, last line, line \fIn\fP.
.TP
.B f F t T \fR;\fP ,
Find/till a character on the line, repeat and reverse.
.TP
.B %
Jump to the matching bracket.
.TP
.B H M L
Top, middle, bottom of the screen.
.TP
.B Ctrl-d Ctrl-u Ctrl-f Ctrl-b
Half/full page down and up.
.SS Operators
.TP
.B d c y
Delete, change, yank \(em followed by a motion or text object, or doubled
.RB ( dd ", " cc ", " yy ).
.TP
.B > <
Indent and dedent
.RB ( >> ", " << ).
.TP
.B gc\fItag\fP{motion} gcc
Toggle comments.
.TP
.B D C Y x X s S r ~ J
Delete/change to end of line, delete char, substitute, replace char, toggle
case, join lines.
.SS "Text objects"
.TP
.B iw aw i( a( i" a" \fR(and\fP i[ a{ i< i' i`\fR)\fP
Inner/around word, brackets, and quotes, e.g.
.BR ciw ", " di" ", " da( .
.SS Surround
.TP
.B ys\fItag\fP{motion}{char}
Surround the motion's text with {char}, e.g.
.B ysiw)
wraps the inner word in parentheses.
.TP
.B cs{old}{new}
Change surrounding {old} to {new}, e.g.
.BR cs"' .
.TP
.B ds{char}
Delete the surrounding {char}, e.g.
.BR ds( .
.SS "Registers, undo, repeat"
.TP
.B \(dq{a-z}
Select a register for the next yank/delete/paste.
.TP
.B p P u Ctrl-r .
Paste after/before, undo, redo, repeat last change.
.SS "Multiple cursors"
.TP
.B Ctrl-n Ctrl-p
Add a cursor on the line below / above. Movement,
.BR x ,
and
.BR i / a / I / A
plus typing apply to every cursor;
.B Esc
collapses to one.
.SS "Marks and macros"
.TP
.B m{a-z} `{a-z} '{a-z}
Set a mark, jump to it exactly, jump to its line.
.TP
.B q{a-z} \fR...\fP q \fR then\fP @{a-z}
Record and replay a macro.
.SH "VISUAL MODE"
.B v
character\-wise,
.B V
line\-wise, and
.B Ctrl-v
block\-wise. Move to extend the selection, then
.BR d / c / y / x / > / < .
In block mode,
.B I
and
.B A
insert at the left/right edge of every selected line. Press
.B S{char}
to surround the selection.
.SH "PICKERS (Space leader)"
.TP
.B Space f
Fuzzy file finder (file names).
.TP
.B Space /\fR, \fPSpace s
Global search across file \fIcontents\fP.
.TP
.B Space w\fR, \fPSpace q
Write, quit.
.PP
In a picker, type to filter,
.B Ctrl-n
/
.B Ctrl-p
or the arrow keys to move the selection,
.B Enter
to open, and
.B Esc
to cancel. The in\-buffer
.B /
and
.B ?
search the current file; use
.B Space /
to search across files.
.SH "COMMAND LINE"
.TP
.B :w \fR[\fPname\fR]\fP :q :wq :x :q! :{n} ZZ ZQ
Write, quit (blocked when there are unsaved changes), write\-and\-quit, force
quit, go to line \fIn\fP, write\-and\-quit, quit without writing.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TERM
Used for terminal capabilities. A Nerd Font is recommended so the powerline
statusline separators render correctly.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error (e.g. not a terminal, or a file could not be opened).
.TP
.B 2
Command\-line usage error.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Aashish Gupta.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR nvim (1),
.BR hx (1),
.BR vim (1)
